DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: DISTRIBUTION UNLIMITED
S0570-AC-
CCM-010/8010
Chapter 4
HOT WORK AND FIRE WATCH
References
(a) S9086-CH-STM-010, Naval Ships’ Technical Manual (NSTM) Chapter 074, Volume 1, Welding and Allied Processes
(b) S6470-AA-SAF-010, Naval Maritime Confined Space Manual
(c) Occupational Safety and Health Standards for Shipyard Employment, 29 CFR Part 1915 Subpart P, Fire Protection in
Shipyard Employment
(d) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Codes and Standards 51B, Standard for Fire Prevention During Welding,
Cutting, and Other Hot Work
(e) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Codes and Standards 312, Standard for Fire Protection of Vessels During
Construction, Conversion, Repair, and Lay-up
(f) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Codes and Standards 306, Standard for the Control of Gas Hazards on
Vessels
(g) Occupational Safety and Health Standards for Shipyard Employment, 29 CFR Part 1915 Subpart B, Confined and
Enclosed Spaces and Other Dangerous Atmospheres in Shipyard Employment
(h) NAVSEA OP 4, Ammunition and Explosives Safety Afloat
Introduction
In accordance with the hot work requirements of references (a) through (c), this chapter implements the necessary
precautions, procedures, and safety requirements as related to hot work operations during an industrial availability. This
chapter applies to all SRCAs (except new construction shipyards) and covers all Navy ships – submarines, surface ships, and
aircraft carriers.
The very existence of hot work operations in an industrial environment poses an increased risk to SF and SRCA workers,
justifying the need for additional fire watches and fire extinguishers, in parallel with the combustible loading requirements
contained in chapter 5 of this manual. Flexibilities are built into the fire watch requirements contained here-in to ensure
proper visible coverage of hot work operations by minimal personnel. In implementation of these requirements, it is
important to note that the prevention and early detection of a small fire is the most effective means of preventing a major
shipboard fire.
4.1 HOT WORK MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT.
4.1.1 Classifications of Hot Work. Consistent with references (a) and (b), hot work includes the following operations:
a. Flame heating, welding, torch cutting, brazing, and carbon arc gouging.
b. Work which produces heat, by any means, of 400 °F (204 °C), or more.
c. Grinding, drilling, abrasive blasting, or similar spark-producing operations EXCEPT when such operations are
isolated physically from any atmosphere containing 10 percent or greater of the Lower Explosive Limit of a
flammable or combustible substance.
4.1.2 Hot Work MOA. Prior to performing hot work during an availability, the NSA shall ensure that a Memorandum of
Agreement (MOA) is in place with the ship to cover the hot work notification process. The ship shall be notified in advance
of hot work, and status of hot work jobs shall be kept up to date at least daily. The following shall be considered with regards
to the MOA:
a. The NSA shall ensure that all hot work performed by all maintenance and modernization activities during the
availability is coordinated through the LMA.
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: DISTRIBUTION UNLIMITED
4-1
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: DISTRIBUTION UNLIMITED
S0570-AC-
CCM-010/8010
b. For hot work performed outside of an availability with an assigned NSA, the SRCA will establish a MOA(s)
between the ship and all outside activities performing hot work.
4.2 HOT WORK AUTHORIZATION.
4.2.1 Written Notice. As required per reference (c), hot work shall only be conducted after a written notice for each job or
separate area of hot work aboard ship is provided and a fire watch posted. The written notice shall include the following
attributes:
a. State a description of the work to be done.
b. List the specific location of the hot work to include compartment number and the compartment numbers of adjacent
decks, bulkheads and similar structures upon which hot work is to be accomplished.
c. State the time hot work will commence.
d. List the current gas-free status of the area.
e. List the absence or existence of combustible material within 35 feet of the operation (or further if affected by the
operation), and if combustible material exists, the action taken to protect the material from fire.
f. State the provision and assignment of a fire watch.
g. Affirm that conditions at work site (ventilation, temporary lighting, and accesses) permit the fire watch(es) to have a
clear view of and immediate access to all areas included in the fire watch.
h. Affirm that a suitable fully charged fire extinguisher is available at the job site.
i. Provide for an inspection of the area 30 minutes after completion of the hot work or the cessation of hot work at the
job site as the final action to complete the notice. If after 30 minutes the job site is not cool to the touch, do not
leave the job site, and notify the nearest watch-stander/manager. When strip heaters are in use for post weld heat
treatment, the fire watch shall remain in the hot work area for at least 30 minutes after completion of the welding,
and shall survey the exposed area(s), and make a determination that there is no further fire hazard prior to
completing the notice and leaving the area.
4.2.2 Signing Authority. The notice shall be signed by a supervisor specifically designated as responsible for coordination of
the hot work and the fire watch requirement.
4.2.3 Posting of Notice. One copy of each notice shall be conspicuously posted at the location where the hot work is being
accomplished, and the Commanding Officer’s designated representative shall be notified of all areas where hot work is being
performed.
4.2.4 Notice to the CO’s Representative. The notice to the Commanding Officer’s designated representative shall precede
the initiation of the actual hot work in order to permit the Commanding Officer to designate a member of the crew to observe
the operation, if desired.
4.3 GAS-FREE PROCEDURES AND SPECIAL HAZARDS.
4.3.1 Governance for Gas Free Procedures. The Navy Maritime Confined Space Program shall be the governing authority
for gas-free procedures. All gas-free procedures shall be in accordance with references (d) through (f).
4.3.1.1 For Naval activities, gas-free procedures shall also be in accordance with reference (b).
4.3.1.2 For contractor activities, gas-free procedures shall also be in accordance with reference (g).
4.3.2 Restricted Areas for Hot Work. Hot work shall not be conducted in closed or poorly ventilated spaces as defined in
reference (b), subject to the risk of fire, explosion, exposure to toxic substances, or suffocation or asphyxiation, until
appropriate test and procedures have been conducted in accordance with references (b) and (c).
4.3.3 Coverings. Fire-resistant coverings meeting the requirements of chapter 5 of this manual shall be secured in place
prior to commencing hot work to adequately protect piping and equipment.
4.3.4 Lines/Piping Containing Flammable or Combustible Fluids. Lines/piping containing flammable and/or combustible
fluids shall be depressurized and protected from damage/heat while conducting welding or hot work operations adjacent to
these lines/pipes.
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: DISTRIBUTION UNLIMITED
4-2
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: DISTRIBUTION UNLIMITED
S0570-AC-
CCM-010/8010
4.3.5 Proximity of Flammables and Combustibles. Consistent with references (a) and (c), where practicable relocate all
flammables and combustibles at least 35 feet from hot work operations to prevent the spread of fire unless the requirements
of paragraph 4.1.1.(c) are met. Where relocation is impracticable, protect combustibles with metal or guards and curtains
constructed of material meeting the requirements of sections 5.1.3.1 or 5.1.3.2.
4.3.6 Ammunition or Explosives. Hot work operations in or adjacent to areas containing ammunition or explosive material
or substance shall be conducted in accordance with reference (h).
4.3.6.1 Hot work shall not be conducted during any logistics or maintenance movement of ammunition or explosives.
4.3.6.2 Hot work shall not be conducted during any fueling operations without approval by the FSC and risk mitigation
implemented.
4.3.7 Battery Charging Operations. The following precautions shall be employed during battery charging operations:
a. Care taken to prevent accidental sparking of electrical apparatus.
b. Suspension of hot work except for submarines which have the Submarine Valve Regulated Lead Acid (SVRLA)
battery that have ventilation and atmospheric control equipment lined up in accordance with the class Ship Systems
Manual and the battery is being operated in accordance with the appropriate SVRLA battery technical manual.
4.3.8 Additional Precautions. Necessary safety precautions shall be taken prior to conducting hot work on tanks, piping
systems, or components which have previously contained flammable liquids. This includes hot work operations within 35
feet of tanks or piping that contain or previously contained flammable liquids in accordance with reference (b).
4.4 FIRE WATCH REQUIREMENTS AND TRAINING.
4.4.1 Fire Watch Policy. Each SRCA shall create and maintain a written fire watch policy meeting the requirements of
reference (c). Personnel, including SF, performing hot work and/or hot work watch standing shall undergo a training
program that covers their specific responsibilities in accordance with reference (c).
4.4.2 Additional Duties During Hot Work. The fire watch shall not accomplish other duties while hot work is in progress.
4.4.3 Limitations to Single Fire Watch with Multiple Hot Workers. A single fire watch may provide protection where
several hot workers are performing hot work in a single work area with the following limitations:
a. The fire watch must have an unobstructed view, without turning, of all hot work operations and exposed areas from
a single fixed location at which he is stationed and have no physical obstructions or barriers that would prevent
immediate access by the fire watch to the hot work operation should a fire occur.
b. No more than four hot workers shall be attended by a single fire watch.
c. The fire watch cannot rove from one compartment/area to another in carrying out their duties as a fire watch in a
way which would affect the requirement of maintaining a continuous line of sight view of all hot work.
d. A means of communicating between the fire watch and all hot workers shall be provided such that in the event of a
fire, the fire watch can immediately notify all hot workers to stop operations.
4.4.4 Hot Work Involving Multiple Levels. In cases in which hot material from hot work may involve more than one level,
as in trunks, machinery spaces, and on scaffolding, a fire watch shall be stationed at each level unless positive means are
available to prevent the spread or fall of hot material.
4.4.5 Bulkhead or Deck Hot Work. In cases where hot work is to be accomplished on a bulkhead or deck, combustible
material shall be removed from the vicinity of the hot work on the opposite side of the bulkhead, overhead, or deck, and a fire
watch shall be posted at each location.
4.4.6 Blind Compartment Hot Work. If multiple blind compartments are involved in any hot work job, fire watches shall be
posted simultaneously in each blind area.
4.4.7 Communication Between Fire Watches. When more than one fire watch is required, a communication means between
the fire watches shall be established.
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: DISTRIBUTION UNLIMITED
4-3
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: DISTRIBUTION UNLIMITED
S0570-AC-
CCM-010/8010
4.4.8 Fire Extinguishers. Fire extinguishers used for hot work shall be provided by the performing activity and shall not be a
ship’s installed extinguisher.
4.4.9 Fire Watch Training. All fire watches shall undergo a training program in accordance with references (a) and (c) that
covers, at a minimum, their responsibilities, use of fire extinguishing and other required safety equipment, inspection of
immediate and surrounding areas before, during, and after hot work, assigned station during actual hot work, method of
communication between fire watch and hot work operator, the appropriate reporting procedure for a fire while assigned as a
fire watch and the sounding of fire alarms.
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: DISTRIBUTION UNLIMITED
4-4
