DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: DISTRIBUTION UNLIMITED
S0570-AC-
CCM-010/8010
Chapter 11
FIRE AND SMOKE BOUNDARIES
Introduction
This chapter provides requirements for sustaining fire zone boundaries and fire and smoke boundaries during industrial
availabilities. This chapter applies to all platforms – submarines, surface ships, and aircraft carriers.
In an industrial environment, it is imperative to maintain the integrity of ships’ fire zone boundaries in order to contain a fire
in its originating compartment/fire zone, and limit the fire from spreading to other locations in the ship. While ships are
designed and built with fire zone boundaries, maintenance availabilities present unique circumstances where these as-built
boundaries may become compromised. The FSC is empowered to mitigate the risks associated with compromised fire zone
boundaries, and guidance, including the use of non-combustible fume tight closures and smoke curtains during these
situations, is provided here-in for implementation.
11.1 FIRE ZONE BOUNDARIES. A fire zone boundary is a permanent, continuous, interior bulkhead or deck system
designed to limit the passage of flame and smoke beyond a fire zone and provides protected staging areas for firefighters.
11.1.1 Requirements for Fire Zone Boundaries. The ship’s permanent fire zone boundaries shall be maintained to the extent
practicable throughout the availability. This includes maintaining the capability of fire insulation where installed, fire-rated
penetrations such as multi-cable transits (MCTs) and pipe penetrations, fume-tightness of the boundary, etc. Existing
transverse watertight, airtight, and fume-tight bulkheads shall be used on ships built prior to the requirement for fire zones.
Where ships have fire zones by design, the designated bulkheads and decks shall be used. When authorized industrial work
requires disestablishment of ship’s permanent fire zone boundaries, alternate fire zone boundaries shall be designated by the
FSC. The fire zone boundary shall be continuous throughout the vertical extent of the ship, from keel up to the flight deck on
carrier type ships and from keel up to the main deck on other ships unless designated higher.
11.1.2 Fire Zone Boundaries (Submarines). For submarines, fire zone boundaries shall consist of the watertight transverse
bulkheads between the engine room, missile compartment (when applicable), and forward compartment.
11.1.3 Temporary Access Cuts through Fire Zone Boundaries. Temporary access cuts through fire zone boundaries shall be
minimized. Where unavoidable, they shall be provided with non-combustible fume-tight closures. Aluminum shall not be
used as a closure.
11.1.4 Disabling/Degrading Fire Zone Boundaries. The disabling or degrading of fire zone boundary closures or
penetrations shall be approved by the FSC and will require a temporary closure system, such as fire resistant smoke curtains,
strategically placed with an ability to drop quickly, which can be set by personnel leaving the space.
11.1.5 Marking Fire Zone Boundaries. Each designated fire zone boundary shall be identified with a sign on each side of the
access through the boundary.
11.1.6 Record of Boundary Openings. An up-to-date record of boundary openings and access cuts, and their locations shall
be kept aboard ship by ship’s force. The location of fire zone boundaries and designated fire and smoke boundaries shall be
noted on drawings at the CASCON Station and/or DCC/Quarterdeck.
11.1.7 Boundaries on Carrier Type Ships. On carrier type ships, the hangar division door travel paths shall remain free of
obstructions such that they can be freely operated in the event of a fire. A means (such as a chain-fall) shall be provided to
close the hangar division doors in case of fire, in the event division doors are mechanically inoperable because of
maintenance actions. In the event maintenance actions will render a division door totally immovable, work shall be
sequenced and approved by the FSC, such that one set of doors will always be available to close in the event of a fire. Any
exceptions shall be submitted for approval to the FSC.
11.2 FIRE AND SMOKE BOUNDARIES.
11.2.1 Fire Boundaries. A fire boundary is a temporary boundary set during a fire by immediate fire responders or
firefighters by closing doors, hatches, and other closures. A fire boundary is intended to limit fire and smoke spread from a
space, group of spaces, deck(s), or compartment/fire zone within a ship, and provide staging areas for fire parties. Watertight
transverse bulkheads are typically utilized as fire boundaries.
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: DISTRIBUTION UNLIMITED
11-1
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: DISTRIBUTION UNLIMITED
S0570-AC-
CCM-010/8010
11.2.2 Smoke Boundaries. A smoke boundary is a bulkhead, deck, or other fume-tight boundary which is set during a fire to
limit smoke spread and air supply to a fire. On submarines, a smoke boundary is a designated boundary between spaces
within a major compartment, or at a fire zone boundary or hull penetration which is pre-rigged or set during a fire to contain
smoke. Fume-tightness may be achieved by rigging a smoke curtain. Smoke boundaries may not be designed to serve as a
fire barrier.
11.2.3 Traverse Bulkheads versus Compartments. Although watertight transverse bulkheads separating submarine
compartments serve as fire and smoke boundaries, fire and smoke boundaries generally cannot be set within compartments,
such as the engine room and missile compartment, since complete bulkheads and decks do not exist.
11.2.4 Acceptable Boundaries. The boundary of certain spaces within a submarine compartment, such as auxiliary
machinery room, radio and Electronic Control Management (ECM) room, and sonar control room, are generally of sufficient
tightness to serve as a fire and smoke boundary. Doors and hatches serving such spaces should be kept closed during a fire to
minimize fire and smoke spread.
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: DISTRIBUTION UNLIMITED
11-2
